kep: add supported scaling modes and relevant topologies to KEP 1 (#234)
Kong/gateway-operator: keps/0001-managed-gateways.md

[ohub]:https://operatorhub.io/
[prjx]:https://www.cncf.io/projects/

#### Supported Scaling Modes & Network Topologies

> Providing managed `Gateways` has implications for network topology: A `Gateway`

Author: ```suggestion
Providing managed `Gateways` (or headless `DataPlanes`) has implications for network topology: A `Gateway`
```

may have one or many underlying "instances" (think `Pods`, system processes,
e.t.c.) and may have a control plane that is network adjacent, or running
somewhere outside of the local cluster. `Gateways`, `ControlPlanes` and
`DataPlanes` can all potentially be vertically or horizontally scaled resulting
in changes to network topology for application and control plane traffic. The
purpose of this section is to document the specific scaling modes that we intend
to support, and highlight the network topologies they represent according to
application and control plane traffic flow.

> 

Reviewer: Another scaling question: is horizontal scaling mutually exclusive with vertical? Why/why not?

Author: No. This is mentioned on line 155:

```
These options can be combined with other scaling modes.
```

Author: I've moved and added some language in e0b01b61cbfefcf661d7520d80907b6564659190 let me know if that helps to address this.

> ##### Vertical DataPlane Scalability Mode

Author: I'm very confused by your comment. But I think maybe it's just because the subsections contain all the details about vertical scaling (e.g. changing CPU/Mem). I've added a single sentence which I think may clear this up.

> ##### Vertical DataPlane Scalability Mode

Author: I've completely removed the "single" language in e0b01b61cbfefcf661d7520d80907b6564659190

a single `Gateway` with no other configuration results in this setup by default.
This is therefore considered the "out of the box" mode.

###### User Interface

Since this is a vertical scaling mode the most important tunables are the CPU
and Memory of the underlying `DataPlane`'s `Pod`. Sane defaults will be applied
to `Pods` to avoid unbounded consumption, and the `GatewayConfiguration` will
provide fields for managing the maximum CPU and memory utilization in order to
increase the ceiling when limits are starting to be hit. These options can be
combined with other scaling modes.

###### Network Topology

In this setup all application traffic travels to and from a single `DataPlane`
`Pod`, the edge of which is a `LoadBalancer` type `Service` with only the
single backend `Pod`. `ControlPlane` traffic is transmitted via the `Pod`
network to the `DataPlane` from a network adjacent location.

###### Relevant Issues:

- Vertical Scaling: [#233](https://github.com/Kong/gateway-operator/issues/233)
- Performance Testing: [#235](https://github.com/Kong/gateway-operator/issues/235)

##### Horizontal DataPlane Scalability Mode

> 

Author: I actually started by doing this but it didn't feel like it was time well spent. The diagrams would be very basic, almost entirely obvious, or at least that's where I ended up. You're saying without diagrams you don't think the reader can come to clarity on what the network topology looks like in these cases?

> 

Author: I have added some diagrams in 900b0cbf643c9c8fc802ba7de250f5447e2bfe0d

Horizontal DataPlane Scalability mode implies that there will be 2 or more

> `Pods` provisioned for a `DataPlane` resource. In this mode traffic is split

Author: I'm sorry I'm a bit confused: why would `DataPlane` ever mean to include `ControlPlane`? It occurs to me that the meaning of `DataPlane` is effectively exclusive to the concepts of `ControlPlane`? How do you suggest better capturing this in a way that makes this sentence make more sense?

> `Pods` provisioned for a `DataPlane` resource. In this mode traffic is split

Author: > A DataPlane would never include a KGO ControlPlane. It might spin up a Kong hybrid mode control plane, which is a different thing.

Why would it ever do that? What are the conditions under which we would want a `DataPlane` object to spin up a controlplane instance of the kong gateway in hybrid mode?

[ohub]:https://operatorhub.io/
[prjx]:https://www.cncf.io/projects/

#### Supported Scaling Modes & Network Topologies

Providing managed `Gateways` (or headless `DataPlanes`) has implications for
network topology: A `Gateway` may have one or many underlying "instances"\
(think `Pods`, system processes, e.t.c.) and may have a control plane that is
network adjacent, or running somewhere outside of the local cluster. `Gateways`,
`ControlPlanes` and `DataPlanes` can all potentially be vertically or
horizontally scaled resulting in changes to network topology for application and
control plane traffic. The purpose of this section is to document the specific
scaling modes that we intend to support, and highlight the network topologies
they represent according to application and control plane traffic flow.

##### Vertical DataPlane Scalability Mode

Vertical DataPlane Scalability Mode is the default and most basic: a single
instance exists for the `DataPlane`, and a single instance exists for the
`ControlPlane`, these can be scaled vertically by changing their CPU or Memory
resource availability. The `ControlPlane` is network adjacent to the `DataPlane`

> when providing configuration updates. The `Gateway` API is used to implement

Author: It's not, it's just 99.99% of the time going to be the case. Removed in e0b01b61cbfefcf661d7520d80907b6564659190

deploying a single `ControlPlane` instance which will serve equivalent
configuration to each of them. Regular tests need to be run to determine the
upper bounds of this integration and verify how many `DataPlanes` a single
`ControlPlane` can effectively serve with fast turnaround.

###### User Interface

The `Gateway` API must be used to employ this strategy, as the gateway
controller will be responsible for responding to scaling requests and
provisioning the relevant `DataPlanes`, as well as reconfiguring the
relevant `ControlPlanes` to become connected to them and synchronized.

Scaling requests in this mode will be handled using `GatewayScalingPolicy`,
which is an implementation of a [Policy Attachment][pol] API. The policy
includes a field in the spec for an explicit number of replicas to provision,
as well as options for automatically scaling the `Gateway` according to
[provided resource metrics or custom metrics][hpa]. By default all `Pods` will
be provisioned with node anti-affinity for eachother, though this will also be
configurable through the scaling policy.

###### Network Topology

In this setup application traffic is load-balanced between any number of `Pods`

> all of which are opportunistically placed on separate `Nodes`. `ControlPlane`

Author: It implies anti-affinity. At least at this point in the KEP I don't think we need to get into these details, e.g. how this is all instrumented, but rather we know these things are possible so we can allude to them as part of our high level premise.

traffic is transmitted via the `Pod` network to the `DataPlane` from a network
adjacent location.

###### Relevant Issues

- Horizontal DataPlane Scaling: [#8](https://github.com/Kong/gateway-operator/issues/8)
- Automatic Horizontal DataPlane Scaling: [#171](https://github.com/Kong/gateway-operator/issues/171)
- Performance Testing: [#235](https://github.com/Kong/gateway-operator/issues/235)

[pol]:https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/references/policy-attachment/
[hpa]:https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/

> ##### Hybrid DataPlane Scalability Mode

Reviewer: I'm not sure that "hybrid" belongs to the same category as "horizontal" and "vertical".
It's a deployment pattern that defines classes of systems (Kong control plane, Kong data plane). Each of the classes can be subject to horizontal / vertical scaling on its own, right?

Basically I think that _topologies_ understood as: standalone, hybrid (with a local CP, with psql or not), hybrid (with a CP in the cloud) need good understanding to be built about in this KEP.

Author: Where would you put it instead?

scaling modes can be used in combination with others.

##### Vertical DataPlane Scalability Mode

Vertical DataPlane Scalability Mode is the default and most basic: instances of
the `ControlPlane` and `DataPlane` can be scaled to support more workloads.
This scaling is done "vertically" by changing their CPU or Memory resource
availability and allowing the components to consume more cluster resources
The `Gateway` and `GatewayConfiguration` APIs are used to implement this. This
mode can be combined with other scaling modes.

###### User Interface

Since this is a vertical scaling mode the most important tunables are the CPU
and Memory of the underlying `DataPlane`'s `Pod`. Sane defaults will be applied
to `Pods` to avoid unbounded consumption, and the `GatewayConfiguration` will
provide fields for managing the maximum CPU and memory utilization in order to
increase the ceiling when limits are starting to be hit.

###### Network Topology

In this setup all application traffic travels to and from a single `DataPlane`
`Pod`, the edge of which is a `LoadBalancer` type `Service` with only the
single backend `Pod`. `ControlPlane` traffic is transmitted via the `Pod`

> network to the `DataPlane` from a network adjacent location.

Author: I've completely reworded this in 0be3110e419ed069bee102803f53abcef9ff0b9f, lmkwyt

with a `LoadBalancer` strategy and managed with a simple balancing algorithm
such as "round-robin").

With multiple `Pods` in action the Gateway Operator is responsible for
deploying a single `ControlPlane` instance which will serve equivalent
configuration to each of them. Regular tests need to be run to determine the
upper bounds of this integration and verify how many `DataPlanes` a single
`ControlPlane` can effectively serve with fast turnaround.

###### User Interface

The `Gateway` API must be used to employ this strategy, as the gateway
controller will be responsible for responding to scaling requests and
provisioning the relevant `DataPlanes`, as well as reconfiguring the
relevant `ControlPlanes` to become connected to them and synchronized.

Scaling requests in this mode will be handled using `GatewayScalingPolicy`,
which is an implementation of a [Policy Attachment][pol] API. The policy
includes a field in the spec for an explicit number of replicas to provision,
as well as options for automatically scaling the `Gateway` according to
[provided resource metrics or custom metrics][hpa]. By default all `Pods` will

> be provisioned with node anti-affinity for eachother, though this will also be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
be provisioned with node anti-affinity for each other, though this will also be
```
